When I was CEO, what I felt like was it
was very lonely, it was challenging, it
was hard. I was out navigating and
trying to find resources, support,
people who had come before me who could
help me in that seat. Tracy Britt Cool
is the co-founder of Cambrek, a
long-term investment partnership focused
on building enduring businesses. She is
best known for working directly with
Warren Buffett at Berkshire Hathaway,
where she served as his financial
assistant before becoming CEO of
Pampered Chef and serving on the board
of several Berkshire companies,
including Benjamin Moore and Kraft
Heinz. She combines investor discipline
with hands-on operating experience,
bringing a rare perspective on what it
takes to grow and sustain great
companies. We only invest in one or two
companies here. We'll look at 500, so
we're really selective at finding the
highest quality businesses that have a
long runway. I also think a lot of
investors haven't actually been
operators, and so it's really hard to go
into a business and say this is what you
should go do to operate a business if
you've never actually operated a
business.
>> When it comes to hiring, like what does
that process look like? Like what does
that nitty-gritty look like in the
detail?
>> We very much subscribe to the Who
process, so by Geoff Smart, there's a
book called Who, w h o. It is, I think,
single-handedly the best simple book on
hiring. And there's a few components to
it, and we've augmented in and added our
own, but the first is building a really
in-depth scorecard for the role. And so
a good scorecard in my our mind has
three sort of critical components. The
first is
The second is and then the third are
Members get access to an extended
version of this conversation that goes
further into frameworks, definitions,
and strategies Tracy uses to build
lasting companies. Sign up today at
fs.blog/membership.
This episode of The Knowledge Project is
for informational purposes only. The
views and opinions expressed by Shane
Parrish or our guests are solely their
own. Nothing in this conversation should
be considered investment advice,
financial guidance, or a recommendation
to buy or sell any security. Always do
your own due diligence or consult with a
qualified financial advisor before
before making investment decisions. It's
time to listen and learn. Tracy, welcome
to the show.
>> Thank you. It's an honor to be here. I
appreciate it. I want to start with what
you're reading recently. Yeah. So, on
the biographies, I just read Melinda
Gates' "The Moment of Transition" book
that she just came out with not too long
ago, which I thought was super
interesting. Reread Alan Mulally's
"American Icon," which I think is
fascinating in terms of a turnaround and
the impact of that. Recently reread
Katharine Graham's autobiography.
>> Yeah, it's so good. Yeah, it's so
amazing. So, that's been my focus and
where I've found the most interest
recently. And then also several books on
parenting. So, "The Anxious Generation,"
obviously, a lot of people are talking
about, but that has spawned me going
down a path on reading more about kids
and free-range kids, books like that, of
how to think about parenting in sort of
this new world. How many kids do you
have? We have four. Oh gosh. Okay, what
are the ages? 10, 7, 5, and 2. Okay. We
had Alan on the show. I'm curious what
you took away from his biography. I
thought it was single-handedly the best
book in navigating a turnaround. The
time in which he did a turnaround in the
business, how challenging it was, the
landscape in 2008, 2009, Ford, and the
auto industry. I mean, really, really
challenging. And just the discipline
with which he did it, everything from
you his team coming in and was green
every week, even though you know, he was
trying to get them to celebrate having
reds in the business and the challenges
and how to learn from those and making
mistakes is okay.
So, I really appreciated that insight
and just how he did it. Having done a
turnaround at a much smaller scale, I
was incredibly impressed with his focus
on people, his focus on discipline, his
focus on building a culture of
continuous improvement, learning, making
mistakes. I thought that was just really
eye-opening and just how he did it in
the backdrop of the time he did he did
it. One of the things that he mentioned
that still sticks with me to this day is
he laid out his operating philosophy,
and then he said, "Well, if you're not
partaking in that, you're choosing not
to be a part of our team." And I thought
that was a really interesting way of
putting it back on the person that
they're making a choice whether they
want to be part of the team or not.
>> Yes, I couldn't agree more. I think when
you're in a company and you set a
culture and expectations and an
operating system, then you say to your
employees, you know, is this what you
want to be part of? And if not, we
understand that and you can choose to
leave the business, but if you want to
stay here, you need to get on board.
When I was CEO, we were going through
transformation, and I said to our team
often, and they almost told me to stop
saying it was, "If you're not having fun
4 days out of 5 in this new culture and
environment, it's probably not right fit
for you, and we encourage you to move
on, we'll promote you to customer,
whatever it may be." I think you want
your team to be really committed,
engaged, focused on driving the results,
but also that it resonates with them and
they care about it. And the turnaround
you're talking about is Pampered Chef?
>> Mhm. Can you walk me through that? What
was that like? It was really
interesting. So, I took the role at
Pampered Chef having no prior experience
operating a business. I'd been at
Berkshire for about 5 years. I really
had a view that the investing landscape
was shifting and more value would be
created going forward on operating side,
but that very few investors actually
have operating experience, especially on
the more buyout side. You see it more in
venture, but less on buyout. And I
thought I'd be a better investor if I
went and got out of the boardroom, got
into the war room, and actually went and
operated a business. So, I decided to
become CEO of Pampered Chef. Pampered
Chef was a business that was in need of
transformation. It had been in decline
since Berkshire bought it for about 10
years. And the fundamentals were intact.
It had a really strong brand and a
strong channel, so the moat was really
there
in terms of the business, but it had a
lost its way. Not dissimilar from a lot
of ebbs and flows of consumer
businesses, where you grow, but your
customer changes or the world changes.
And in that case, the world had changed
quite significantly, and the internet
had come along in the early 2000s, which
had fundamentally shifted the business,
and then the customer started shopping
differently and shopping online.
Pampered Chef was originally started 45
years ago now by Doris Christopher in
the basement of her home to really solve
this need of providing high-quality
kitchenware products to families around
the country through a direct sales
model. So, there were consultants who
sold the products. So, in 2015
or 14, when I took over, it had 10 years
of decline. So, it was an interesting
opportunity to come into a business that
was in need of transformation, where
there was this opportunity to rethink
the business model, rethink the
approach, but I'd never done it before.
So, it was a fundamentally new role for
me to take on in an industry I didn't
know.
Ironically, I don't cook, so I had to
learn the basics, but it was a really
great opportunity to do that. There's
two things you said there that are
really interesting to me, one of which
was value creation moving from investing
to operating. Tell me more about that. I
think for a long time in the investing
world on the buyout side, what you saw
was there was opportunity to buy
businesses at 7, 8, 9 times, and then,
you know, a few years later, some minor
improvements, sell them for 10, 11, 12
times. I think that that has shifted
because capital is now commoditized.
There's a lot more capital available to
sellers than there ever has been. For
example, in the 1980s, there were, you
know, 20, 25 private equity firms. In
2020, you got close to 20,000 in the US.
So, significant shift in terms of the
capital that was out there. As sellers,
rightfully so, gaining more of that
value when they're being partnered with,
that means you have to create more value
after the partnership starts, and that
means more of a focus on operating.
Traditional private equity, the focus is
very short-term. You know, you buy a
business, you're focused on selling it 3
to 4 years later. And in doing that, I
think what ultimately happens is you
make short-term decisions about the
businesses. And if you're going to
really create long-term value, I think
there's a value of having a longer-term
approach. When I wanted to go become an
operator, it was, "I know I'm going to
need to create value in companies once
you partner with them. How do I think
about that, and how do I become a better
operator? It'll make me a better
investor."
>> I want to go back to something you said
earlier about the changing landscape in
companies not adapting. Is it
complacency? Is it they're running the
business on a map that's outdated? Like
why is it companies have a hard time
adapting to reality?
>> I think there's a few reasons it
happens. One is, I think, change is
happening faster and faster than it ever
has, and it's very hard when you're
managing a business and you're focused
on your customer and you're focused on
your product or your service to also
focus on this outside world and
landscape. You have things like COVID,
tariffs, supply chain. There's always
something happening, now AI. What does
that mean for your business and how do
you navigate it? Also, a lot of false
starts. You don't know, is this one here
to stay or is this something that's
going to be gone quickly? And I think as
a leader, that's challenging to
navigate. I think second is, if you
think about most leaders, they usually
grow up in a business often times. When
you grow up in a business, you become an
expert in that business, in that field,
in that industry, but sometimes you
don't have the perspective of seeing
other industries that perhaps have come
before you that are different but
similar in terms of what happened. And
so, you lose some of that perspective.
You gain the depth of experience, but
that perspective is harder to have. And
I think for us is like, how do we help
leaders think about that and help them
see around the curves that might be
challenging, but I think those are a
couple of reasons that it's becoming
more difficult for leaders. Let's go
back all the way to the beginning. You
grew up on a farm in Manhattan, Kansas.
Is that correct?
>> When I went to college, people would
often say, "Where are you from?" And I'd
say, "Manhattan," cuz that's what you
say in Kansas, and people will start
asked like, "Oh, are you from the Upper
East Side or where?" I'm like, "Well,
there's not really an Upper East Side."
And I quickly realized Kansas was
sufficient in saying where I'm from
because most people don't fully
appreciate there's another Manhattan
that's much smaller. What are some of
the lessons you remember from growing up
on the farm and the responsibilities
that you had at such a young age and how
you think about that in relation to
parenting now?
>> I joke I spent much of my life trying to
get off the farm and now I want a farm
for my own kids because I think it's
such a valuable landscape to learn and
to learn work ethic and commitment and
problem-solving, all the things that
come with with being on a farm. My dad,
you know, he owned this farm and he
loved it. And so, the first lesson I
learned, when you find something you
love, it really is a passion and
something that you enjoy and you're not
really working. My dad worked harder
than anyone I've ever seen, you know,
late at night, early in the mornings,
all summer long, all throughout the
winter. He took a small break, but that
was about it. For him, it wasn't
working. It was what he loved. That
passion was something that I recognized
and saw early on. Second, I learned a
lot of independence. On a farm, just the
nature of it is you're figuring things
out. There's a lot of inherent dangers
or risks. I was driving when I was, you
know, 11, 12 years old on the farm, not
necessarily on the road yet, but I
learned how to navigate unfamiliar
situations, which was important lesson
for me early on.
And then I also learned, you know, an
assets business from a very
fundamentally young age. When I was
probably in third, fourth grade, I
started running my own farmers market
stand. And so, my dad would take me down
in the morning, drop me off. I would run
it for the day and he'd come pick me up
at the end of the day. And we got really
busy and I started hiring my friends and
I got to practice, do I pay them by the
hour, do I pay them a commission, do I
pay them a bonus, how do I get the best,
you know,
um performance out of them. I started
thinking about supply and demand and
pricing. I saw as we grew watermelons
beginning of season, they were $8 each
when they were very limited. By the
season when we had a lot, they were $2
each. Learning fundamentals of a
business was really valuable even if it
was a farmers market stand. I could get
better and better every week. I could
build the foundation of how to have a,
you know, repeatable, scalable system to
improve my odds of success. And I saw
our farmers market stand going from
making $500 a week to 1,000 to 1,500 by
the time, you know, I had really scaled
it up, uh which was great for me and
really just a fascinating learning
experience. Was this your parents
helping you or all self-driven? Like
reading and applying or
>> Yeah, definitely self-driven. My dad, um
I was the youngest of seven kids. He had
been married previously, so four from
his first marriage and three from from
ours. And what I saw in that was like he
just let me He let me do a lot, um
probably more so than your average kid
because he was older and he had seven
kids and he had sort of seen it all. And
my brother navigated sort of the farming
part of the business. That wasn't my
passion, but the business side I did
love. And so, it started out small, my
own farmers market stand, but over time
it was running our whole store and
running more and more of the business.
And I think he appreciated it. It wasn't
my dad's passion either. He loved the
farming side. And it was an opportunity
to really learn and grow and try
different things in a relatively safe
space, which was really amazing. Where
did the ambition come from to go to
Harvard? It wasn't um as structured or
as disciplined as I would have thought.
I knew I wanted to leave the farm. As
much as I liked the business side, it
was hard. It was very very hard manual
work. And I wanted to get off the farm
and, you know, go do something else. I
didn't know what that something else
was, but I knew I wanted to leave. In
high school, decided education was the
way to get there and I'd always had good
grades and done a lot of
extracurriculars and managed a lot on
the farm, but I wanted to apply to a lot
of colleges and I didn't know which one.
I didn't know where. I just knew I could
apply to all these schools and I
probably could get into one or two that
I'd be interested in going to. So, I
just sort of applied everywhere cuz I
didn't know anyone at that time who had
gone to Harvard or other schools. I
mean, really outside of Kansas. And so,
it was a great opportunity for me to
just put my hat in the ring and sort of
see what would come from it. And then
you immediately went to HBS after. What
was the decision-making process like to
just do an undergrad and then right into
HBS? You knew what you wanted, I assume.
I think there were a couple components.
One is I had a mentor who had done
something similar at a different school
and she had really advocated if I knew
what I wanted to do, that it was a path
that allowed more efficiency and also
not having to, you know, revisit it
later in life. At that stage, I had
found business, I had found investing. I
knew I was passionate about those areas.
I felt like I had a clear direction of
what I wanted to go do. I also think
going straight from college to business
school, which I advise to students now,
is you really on three metrics you need
to make sure you're ready. Socially,
you're going to be with students who are
much older than you are on average.
Academically, can you bring something to
the classroom that's valuable and
insightful? And then career-wise, you're
going to be competing for jobs with
other people who have more experience
than you. Socially, I'd always felt, you
know, like I was older than my peers. I
think the nature of growing up, again,
in in a farm or family business is you
oftentimes just get more independence
and you age a little bit quicker.
Second, I think in terms of
academically, I hadn't been in a
traditional career, but I had run our
family business from, you know, a young
age and so, I felt like I had
experiences to draw from that would help
me in in the classroom and be relevant.
And then third, from a career
perspective, I didn't know where to go,
but I felt like I'd figure it out and I
wasn't as worried about that. That
wasn't what I was going to business
school for. It was to to learn and grow
and become a better person in terms of
my own expertise and skills. And then
when it came to finding a job, my
understanding is you wrote a whole bunch
of letters to different CEOs. Tell me
about that.
>> I actually started writing letters in
college to CEOs and I just wanted to
learn. So, I wrote letters to different
CEOs in business and in finance saying,
"Can I come and pick your brain?" I
wrote a letter to Ace Greenberg at Bear
Stearns and he graciously said, "Yes,
come down and visit." And so, I came,
went to the trading floor, sat with him
for a couple of hours and he just
answered my questions as I thought about
investing. He was, you know, obviously,
a legend in the finance field, but he
was gracious and willing to spend time
with me. And I think that was a huge
lesson for me because people want to
help other people and they especially
want to help young people. Being a
student, I was able to get access to
people who otherwise probably would have
said no and they probably should have in
terms of their time. You know, they were
very busy, but it was a really great
opportunity. I'd written one of those
letters to Warren Buffett to bring his
group of students out to Omaha in
college and got to know him a little bit
through that. I wasn't actually writing
letters for jobs. I was writing letters
to learn. And then when I graduated, I
had a full-time job I ended up. I'd been
an intern and then come back full-time
at a company when I met Warren over the
student group visits. I decided to write
him a letter um and so, that's how I
ultimately ended up at Berkshire. What
do you take away from Berkshire? You
worked there 10 years, right? I think
Warren is very gracious with his
learning and his knowledge and he shares
it widely. He shares it at the annual
meetings, he shares it at the annual
letters. And I felt like I had a front
row seat to really understanding that
and seeing it in action, but I think the
lessons are timeless and they're what he
espouses relatively consistently through
those maxims, which I think is great cuz
everyone can learn from him. But really,
the value of long-term thinking and
long-term compounding, the eighth wonder
of the world is compounding and the
value of that. And if you think
long-term and are set up structurally to
think long-term, there's a lot of value
in that. Second, the value of people and
finding the right people with high
integrity, people who care about what
they're doing and then giving them the
right incentives and the right
encouragement. Warren gave those people
around him, his CEOs or others, really
great autonomy and high expectations,
but really let people have flexibility.
And I saw the value of that. And then
lastly, just the value of continuous
learning improvement. You know, Warren
reads every single day, gets smarter,
gets better. Those in the Berkshire
ecosystem do the same. And I think that
was something that resonated with me
from when I was a kid on the farm. You
know, my dad also focused on getting
better and continuous improvement in a
different field, but it was something
that I saw reinforced at Berkshire.
So, why leave? Berkshire is a phenomenal
place. I mean, it's unique, it's one of
a kind. I don't think there'll be
another one by any means. But Berkshire
is very large in terms of capital. It's
hard to deploy capital. It's hard to
find really great investments, but it's
also especially hard when you're very
large. I saw this opportunity to help
mid-size companies with a long-term
approach with creating value. As much as
I loved my time at Berkshire and would
have been happy there forever, felt like
there was this opportunity to create
something new and special that was
serving a market that really wasn't, I
didn't think, being served well today.
You know, people talk a lot about
product market fit, sales tactics, or
pricing strategy. But the truth is
success in selling often comes down to
something much simpler, the system
behind the sale. That's why I use and
love Shop Pay because nobody does
selling better than Shopify.
They built the number one checkout on
the planet. And with Shop Pay,
businesses see up to 50% higher
conversions. That's not a rounding
error. That's a game-changer. Attention
is scarce. Shopify helps you capture it
and convert it. If you're building a
serious business, your commerce platform
needs to meet your customers wherever
they are, on your site, in store, in
their feed, or right inside their inbox.
The less they think, the more they buy.
Businesses that sell more sell on
Shopify. If you're serious about
selling, the tech behind the scenes
matters as much as the product. Upgrade
your business and get the same checkout
that I use. Sign up for your $1 per
month trial period at
shopify.com/knowledgeproject,
all lowercase. Go to
upgrade your selling today.
shopify.com/knowledgeproject.
Introducing the remarkable paper Pro
move. It's a paper tablet, a digital
notebook that combines the familiar feel
of paper with the digital powers of a
tablet. Start by taking notes with any
of the dozens of built-in templates,
then turn your handwriting into type
text and share it by email or slack. You
can even continue your work on the
desktop or mobile apps. Too much
technology draws us in and shuts out the
world. This paper tablet doesn't. It
will never beep or buzz or try to grab
your attention. So you can devote your
focus to what or who is right in front
of you. It can fit all your notes and
documents and last up to two weeks on a
single charge, but slips easily inside
your jacket pocket. And most
importantly, Remarkable's mission is
about helping you think better. That
means no apps, social media, or any
other distractions. You can try
Remarkable paper Pro move for 100 days
for free. If it's not what you were
looking for, you get your money back.
Visit remarkable.com to learn more and
get your paper tablet today.
Let's dive into Pampered Chef a little
compare and contrast the framework of
Berkshire and what you're doing that's
different.
>> It's hard to say what's similar in the
sense because Berkshire is so unique and
special. It's one of a kind and I don't
think we think that we're going to to
replicate that by any means. What we're
trying to do is really focus on
long-term, creating a long-term
structure with a long-term horizon to
buy and build businesses with the right
approach that we think is valuable to
the companies, valuable to employees,
customers, and ultimately investors.
Second is finding high-quality
businesses that have some sort of moat
or competitive advantage. Great
businesses are hard to find and when you
find a great business with a moat or
competitive advantage and you have a
long runway, you can really invest
behind that. And then I think for us in
terms of one thing that we do distinctly
different than Berkshire is we're much
more hands-on operationally. And that
came from when I was CEO. When I was
CEO, what I felt like was it was very
lonely. It was challenging. It was hard
and I was out navigating and trying to
find resources, support, people who had
come before me who could help me in that
seat. And I kept thinking like it would
be so nice if there was someone who
could tell me how to do a great
strategic planning process or how to
improve my hiring skills or how to build
the right culture or what does great
look like in these different aspects of
managing a business. And so when Brian,
Humphrey, and I started Cambrex, we
really wanted to focus on how do we
build
a system that we can help these mid-size
companies and be the resource that we
wanted when we were operators. We built
the Cambrex business system really
focused on that.
>> There's so much to unpack there. I want
to go back to maybe the first jumping
off point there, which is long-term.
Everybody says long-term. It's become
this sort of thing that's easy to say
and
what's the difference between saying it
and living it? I think of it in three
different ways. One is do you think
long-term? Do you have a long-term
horizon and perspective? A lot of people
can say I think long-term and they may,
but that's only one component. The
second is do you have a structure that
actually allows you to think long-term?
Because if you naturally have a
structure that doesn't allow for that or
doesn't encourage that, you're going to
be pitting yourself with your long-term
horizon against your structure that is
going to encourage you to make
shorter-term decisions. In essence, if
you're focused on selling a business in
3 to 5 years, you're going to make
short-term decisions if your structure
is going to require you or incentivize
you to do that. And then the third is I
think there's differing degrees of
long-term. There is the 50-year
long-term, which I think is really,
really long-term, and then there's
differing gradients of that that can be
utilized and be thought about. And I
don't think all long-term is equal and I
don't think you need to do 50 years
to be sort of long-term. I think there's
some in the in the middle that allows
you to take advantage of that horizon,
take advantage of that structure, but
give you some flexibility where you're
not locking yourself up forever. Even if
you're a long-term thinker, it's kind of
weird, right? Because you're thinking
about
a longer duration, 25 or 50 years, but
you have to act today. Yes. We always
say that there's a balance of short
short-term and long-term. You can't only
think about the long-term. If you only
think about the long-term, you probably
won't get out of the short-term because
you're going to miss the situations of
today, the short-term um sort of
dynamics. When we were at Pampered Chef,
we were turning around the business. Um
Brian was the CFO, I was the CEO, and we
had a management team that was helping
us drive this transformation. And we
were a couple years into the turnaround
and the business was actually doing
quite well. And then in year three, we
had this sort of setback. And what we
saw was we were focusing too much on the
long-term, our long-term strategic
initiatives, our investments in
international growth and new categories.
We had lost sight of the fundamentals
blocking and tackling of today. And what
we had thought was, "Hey, we had focused
on those for 2 years, we had improved
them. Now we could go set our sights on
longer-term thinking." But in reality,
you have to manage the short-term and
you have to manage the long-term. And I
think for us is we had to refocus,
really work on the sales today, the sort
of challenges we were facing in the
moment in order to give us the space to
think about the long-term as well. You
mentioned blocking and tackling and I
think there's a point to be made there
perhaps about how we get trapped in
complexity and making things overly
complicated and sometimes it just comes
down to remembering the basics as as
Munger would say, "Take a simple idea
and take it seriously." Yes. Yeah, I
mean I think that often times we think
of the big things we could go do, you
know, what should the strategy look like
or what's the future vision of this or
what's it going to mean versus how do we
do the fundamentals and do the
fundamentals well? And I think some of
the best um CEOs out there focused on
the fundamentals. I mean Sam Walton at
Walmart, he was all about the
fundamentals and he was in a store every
week and you know, multiple stores every
week focused on how do we deliver for
our customers more effectively. That is
a really important skill set that is
often times undervalued or
underappreciated. And I think that's
really important, especially in mid-size
companies where there's a lot of
blocking and tackling to be done every
single day and often times that rises
all the way up to the management team
and the CEO. It's not something where
just your front line can handle the
blocking and tackling, really everyone
needs to be focused on it.
>> Was the turnaround at Pampered Chef with
the same people or was there a
changeover and a lot of that team? In
this situation at Pampered Chef, we did
change much of the team. The business
had been in decline for about a 10 years
and during that period, we saw a lot of
probably great people in the
organization leave or they had the skill
sets that we needed for the
transformation weren't there or had
atrophied. And so we needed an infusion
of talent. So as an example, when I
started at Pampered Chef, 10% of the
business was digital, 90% was sold in
person through in-person parties.
Employees didn't even have laptops. And
what we saw was while the customer
shifting dramatically, they're shopping
more online, they're shopping more
mobile, and we're selling through an
in-person party model. So we needed to
shift our mindset to say, "Okay, how do
we actually meet customers where they
are and what's important to them in that
process?" And what we found in doing
that was we needed to be more digitally
focused and we needed to shift our own
thinking about technology from back
office and support to a true revenue
generator. And so we needed a new a new
leader in technology and then ultimately
much of a new technology team and
marketing and sales to really complement
that. We brought in a new leader who
really transformed how we thought about
technology and then how we are served
the customer. We took the business from
10% sort of digital to 75%. Now we still
did that through the channels, so
through the sales consultants. We didn't
go on Amazon or you sell direct, but we
actually really focused on how do we
utilize our you competitive advantage,
which was the channel, but help them be
more effective digitally. But I think
it's a good example of sometimes you
need a different skill set or a
different experience to go where you
need to go in a business and sometimes
the legacy team doesn't always have
that. What was it like attracting talent
to a declining business? And I liken
this maybe to sports, right? If you're
on a team that's sort of 0 and 17, it's
really hard to attract free agents that
are capable and competent and who can
change the culture. They're sort of
waiting to see progress before they jump
in or waiting to see a critical mass.
How did you go about attracting talent
to that?
>> It was something we really focused a lot
on early on, understanding what was our
employee value prop. Why would someone
want to come to Pampered Chef? And what
we found was people weren't coming to
Pampered Chef, you know, because they
necessarily loved always loved the
product or our location or some other
factor. They were coming because they
wanted to learn and grow. And we could
give them opportunities through, you
know, a meritocracy that they could
learn and grow more quickly and get
rewarded for that and be excited by what
we were doing. And in essence, you know,
we really focused on storytelling and
saying, "What are we going to go do? And
we're transforming a business. We're
going to reinvent mealtime. We're going
to focus on our purpose, which was
enriching lives one meal and one memory
at a time." That's what we're going to
focus on and that really started to
resonate with sort of employees who were
passionate about learning, growing, and
then doing something that was unique and
special. And then we focused on our
culture of how do we actually accomplish
that through the culture we were
creating both in terms of opportunities,
promotions, incentives, growth, but also
in terms of engagement, giving feedback,
helping people grow and develop. And we
ended up attracting a lot of people who
wouldn't normally go to a kitchenware
products business. I wouldn't normally
go to a kitchenware products business,
but saw this opportunity to build
something unique and special and really
focus on how could we do that here in
the company as well. I love that. I want
to go back to structure being a critical
important to long-term thinking. I've
always as an outsider to Berkshire
thought a lot of the success resulted
from the fact that nobody could come in
at certain point in time and tell
Buffett to do something different. The
structure aligned with what he was doing
for a long-term thinking point of view.
And we have a mutual friend Brent
Beshore who set up the same thing from a
wouldn't call it private equity model,
but he didn't take a 7-year fund where
there's a ticking clock. He made it 28
years and called it permanent equity and
that enables a lot more patient
deployment of capital and enables you to
make investments today that they're
going to bear fruit in 5 or 6 years, but
you won't do that if you're just
flipping a business. Absolutely. I think
that if your time horizon is you 3 to 5
years in a business, you know, I'm going
to sell the business in 3 to 5 years,
everything you're going to do is going
to be short-term in nature just because
of human nature and what how you're
incentivized. So, you're going to come
in and say, "Okay, should I invest in
growing into markets or should I take
price right now? Should I you really
build a strong people system and culture
and engagement that may not pay back for
3 4 5 years or should I take costs out
right now which are going to increase my
short-term value?" Every decision you're
probably going to come up to it's going
to be really really hard to make a
longer term decision because the
pressures are so you have skewed to
making a shorter term action. And so, I
think that the nature of the structure
just creates the wrong incentives. Any
leader in a business will say, you know,
you don't usually get payback in things
as quickly as you think. And so, to get
payback in a year or 2 years or 3 years,
it's hard versus okay, we're going to
move into a new market. You know, that
might take us a few years to get that
set up or we're going to invest in
building a new crop of talent in our
organization so that they're ready to
lead in 5 years. Those are things that
are long-term in nature, but if your
structure you're incentivized on a
shorter term duration, it's just hard to
make those decisions.
>> when you make them, it's hard internally
often unless you have everybody aligned
in the same direction because it's like
oh, we're making this for 5 years, but
all of a sudden the ROI is not what we
thought it would be and abandoned ship
sort of mentality. Oh, absolutely. I
mean, I've been in a number of
businesses where people will say, "Oh,
if we can just get the margins from 10%
to 12% or 12 you and I'm like, "Well,
that's that's really hard to do." Like
that's hard to do. But I remember when I
took the role at Pampered Chef, I had
advised the business for about a year.
So, I had a pretty good sense of I think
what needed to be done. Then I just
needed to go do it and I thought it
would take me a year or two to go drive
the change that was needed to get the
business back on track. And it took
almost three or four because everything
took longer and was harder. You know,
getting the right team, getting the
right culture, investing in the right
you systems in the business. We wanted
to update the marketing and update the
product. All of that took a fair amount
of time and I think that if if my task
was to go sell that business in three or
four years, I don't know if I would have
done all the same things. I probably
would have made some shorter term
decisions that ultimately probably would
have created less value in the business.
>> that's part of the reason that culture
changes are so hard is that they're
longer and harder than you expect.
There's a timeline mismatch as well too.
Like CEO turnover at least in the S&P
500 is as fast as it's ever been if not
faster. And so, you go in or think of a
coach in a sports team, right? You go
into a losing team, you're going to
throw a lot of Hail Mary's because the
expectation is just that, you know, I'm
not going to be here for 10 years. I'll
trade away that first round draft pick.
I'll do these things that maybe would
pay off in 3 to 4 years. Yeah, and I
think that you we all have incentives in
life and so recognizing what the
incentives are often times show us what
behaviors you will will have or what
decisions we'll make. And I think you
mentioned culture. I think culture and
people is the most foundational and
fundamental aspect of any business any
size. I think in mid-size companies in
particular, it's incredibly valuable
because
you have often times more limited
resources. Your team's smaller and so
people are doing more in terms of their
scope of responsibilities, their
capabilities. They often times are very
passionate and committed, but we don't
always invest in that culture. And so,
how do we continue? And I think the best
businesses figure that out, but I think
as companies scale and you get bigger,
there's more complexity in terms of the
people side of things. So, we always
start with people. You know, do we have
the right people in the right seats? Do
we have the right culture? Do we have
the right engagement? Do we have the
right talent development and talent
management? As we think about
businesses, you can really enhance a
business by focusing on the people in
the foundation. We focus there first. We
focus on purpose second. What's the
purpose of the business? What's the
difference we make in the world? Are we
aligned around that? What's the strategy
to go execute that purpose and impact?
And then we think about performance
third. And so, then we say, "Okay, how
do we actually achieve those goals? How
do we drive alignment and accountability
and how do we focus on purpose?" I think
if you start by focusing on performance,
then I think you miss out on really
these foundation settings which are so
critical to get alignment and to drive
ultimately the most value in businesses.
That's another thing that people just
throw out casually. People are most
valuable asset, but it's so easy to say
those words and so hard to live that
because that means investing in your
people. It means probably lowering your
margins at certain points in time. It's
taking a disciplined approach to how we
think about people. So, it's not just
you know, how do I reward people more or
you know, how do we have more you know,
holiday parties or whatever it may it's
actually taking a structured disciplined
approach. We always say with our
companies
typically businesses have a structured
view to thinking about strategy or KPIs
or budgeting. They have a calendar. They
have you know, discipline and a
approach to that. We also say, "Where's
your people calendar? What is your same
level of discipline approach do you have
on people?" Because you should have the
same. And we put it in three buckets.
You know, how do we attract the right
talent? So, that's everything from you
know, hiring to employer value
proposition to what are the most
critical roles to get the right people
in. So, on that attract bucket, how do
we develop talent? Are we thinking about
where people are going in their careers?
Are we helping them get there? How are
we thinking about that? And then
engagement. Are we engaging our talent?
Are we thinking about the culture? Are
we thinking about incentives? Are we
thinking about communication? And how
are we doing that most effectively to
support the the whole organization? The
whole people framework is
so significant in terms of what you can
do in an organization, but it usually
isn't after thought. If you look at
executive teams, usually in mid-size
companies, there may not even be an HR
leader. If they are, it's a more junior
level generalist type person versus a
true talent partner. And so, that weight
all falls on usually the CEO to navigate
it, but that's a lot when you're trying
to navigate everything. And as you're
scaling, it becomes more and more
important because when you're small,
everyone is close to the CEO. They see
it. They feel the culture. They see the
work ethic and discipline. As you get
bigger, you need to sort of step away
and have more of a system and a
structure that allows for that to
continue because not everyone's going to
be sitting you shoulder to shoulder with
the CEO.
How do you evaluate talent?
>> Yeah, so we do a few things within our
businesses as we think about talent.
When we go into a new business, first of
all, we really try to understand what
are the mission critical roles in this
business. We find most mid-size
companies have between 15 and 30 roles
that are the most critical roles to get
right. And these are the ones that are
creating the most value. Each business
it may be slightly different. It may be
sales in one business. It may be product
development in another. It may be
finance in another depending on what
they're doing and how they approach. But
do we really have clarity in what those
are? Do we have the right capabilities?
Sometimes you might have a mission
critical role that you don't have today
that you need the capabilities. So, my
example earlier of Pampered Chef, like
when I started, a mission critical role
for us was technology. We did not have
those capabilities in terms of what we
needed to go do. And so, we had to build
it. But really assessing what are the
mission critical roles that we have. And
then once we do that, we assess, "Okay,
who do we have in those roles today? Are
they rock stars? Are they people who
have you know, a lot of opportunity in
terms of their progression? Or are they
people who are okay today, but maybe
aren't the right people longer term?"
So, we try to really assess that in a
disciplined way. I find the best way is
you go in and with someone and I can
usually send I usually send like a list
of questions that are
I usually have a few different
frameworks, but industry questions,
company questions, department questions,
you questions. And I ask those different
questions. And what I find is you can
usually get someone's sort of assessment
and understanding and their view of the
world pretty effectively by just talking
to them about what they're seeing. And
then that helps us learn and get better
about the business as well. So, that's
typically when we go into business and
what we do. Once we're in a business,
then we really focus okay, how do we
develop our talent? And so, we're using
different conversations and different
processes along the way to really make
sure that we're aligned in doing that.
For us, it starts with do we goal set at
the beginning of the year? Do we have
clear KPIs? Because how do you assess
people if you don't have clear KPIs? And
so, you have KPIs of what are we going
to go achieve? And then you give people
the flexibility to go achieve those. You
don't tell them how to achieve them. You
say, "Okay, you'll be autonomy to go
achieve these." But you give them the
skills. So, we do problem-solving
trading. We help support them so that
they're more equipped to actually go
achieve those goals and you they have
visibility. And then they have the
alignment. We're all going in this
direction. These are the most important
KPIs. And then we incorporate
conversations or feedback where we're
actually giving real-time feedback on,
"Hey, you did this really well. This is
what we could do better." And then
through that you're implementing a
talent management process. And then
alongside of that, you're doing a
leadership development process where
you're identifying your leaders, you're
helping them understand the vision, the
expectations, the strategy. Ultimately,
they're helping shape that strategy. So,
it's a very sort of structured way of
saying, "How do we bring in people at
the right stages, the right time to
really help them enhance their own
development, their own learning, their
own contribution so that we can leverage
their expertise and their their insights
even more critically?" Are there tells
in those interviews that you're doing
with people that maybe they're not the
right fit for where you're going or that
this person isn't as good as we thought
they were going in? I would say the
biggest tell I I say is called hand
waving where you're talking to someone
about something, you ask a question, and
rather than answering the question, they
sort of go all over, they're sort of
hand waving around. Or you start to
drill in more and the hand waving begins
where they can't really understand or
explain it. Typically, people who really
know their craft and know their business
and know the fundamentals can really
explain why we do certain things, why we
don't. They may not have all the skills
to go fix it, but they understand what
the issues are and what the problems
are. And then our goal is to help them
understand, okay, this is how we can go
address that or solve it. But that
usually is in the biggest tell for me of
um is can they get clear, can they get
crisp, do they really understand what's
going on in their space? And it doesn't
mean they need to understand everything
in the business. You they need to
understand the area that they're
responsible for. I find often times the
best people just have a natural
interest, curiosity to solve issues or
will have views on things even outside
of their area. You know, if one of the
questions I'll often times ask is like,
"What are we not doing that we should
be?" Mhm. And people often times will
say stuff in their area, but often times
they'll have stuff in other areas, too,
that, "Hey, I really thought if we, you
know, could focus more on selling to our
customers digitally, that would allow us
to transform the business and we're not
doing that today." You know, things like
that help me sort of see do they have,
you know, this that innate engagement or
excitement about the business and
curiosity? Probably tell a lot. I think
as you were saying that, what came to
mind for me was the ability to talk at
different resolutions from like the 1-in
level to the 30,000-ft and then
transcend the same problem. For me and
my role, um it's understanding where are
we in that conversation and who am I
talking to, how do we get to that level,
and what's the right level? And I find
that people who are on the front line
may not have the 30,000 view on where
we're going in the business, but they're
going to be really good at that 10-ft
view and understanding the problem that
they're trying to solve or, you know,
what's limiting them or holding them
back. So, really sort of figuring out
what's the right level to have that
conversation. How do you go about
finding companies? You've acquired a few
now. We find areas that we like. So, we
say if we want to go fishing, we want to
find a pond with a lot of great fish.
And so, we want to understand what is an
industry that we think has a strong moat
or competitive advantage. We usually
look at that by saying, "Okay, what are
the returns on capital in the space?"
So, quantitatively, can we see if there
is a moat? And then qualitatively, can
we understand the moat more effectively?
How wide is the moat? Is it getting
wider or more narrow over time? Is it
durable? Is it going to withstand the
test of time? And so, we're trying to
sort of find those spaces. Once we find
industries that we think are a fit
there, we spend a fair amount of time
reaching out to businesses, finding
businesses, getting introduced to
businesses. We have operating advisors
who help us understand as well. And then
we really try to get smart and find how
do we add value in these companies? And
then another group of businesses we have
are just people who come to us, people
who hear about what we're doing, who are
excited. And so, they'll come to us and
say, "Are you interested in my
business?" Um which we appreciate. And
we always have the same assessment of,
you know, what's the moat of the
business, you know, quantitatively,
qualitatively, can we assess it? And
then how do we think about those areas?
What we've also done is we have built a
community of 3,000 CEOs, owners, and
founders that we bring together to
provide content and resources and
support. And through that we learn about
new businesses, we learn new spaces,
which help us also be better in terms of
finding businesses that might be a fit
for us. We only invest in one or two
companies a year. We'll look at 500, so
we're really selective at finding the
highest quality businesses that have a
long runway. Is that the most important
part of the process of evaluating the
moat? We call the five M's that we look
at. First is moat, you know, what is the
moat, what's the competitive advantage?
Second is the market, you know, you may
have a moat, but is the market growing
and do we think it's an attractive
market? What is the growth rate, what
are the likely dynamics of that? Third,
we look at management. Does it have a
strong management team today or is it
something where we think we can help
build the management team if there's
opportunities? Sometimes they'll be a
great business, it's got three strong
leaders, but they need to build out a
sales leader or a talent leader or a
finance leader. We can we help them do
that? The fourth is what we call more
potential. And there's some opportunity
that's not being fully leveraged today
that we think we can help them with. It
might be expanding into new markets, it
might be a more structured approach to
how they manage the business today.
There are a variety of different avenues
in terms of more potential, but
absolutely a focus. And then for us, the
fifth is margin of safety. And what we
mean by margin of safety is we don't
want to have have to have everything go
perfectly right in order for us to be
successful. We want to have a little bit
of flex so that if there is something
like COVID or a downturn or tariff that
we can navigate that well with the
management team and we don't put undue
pressure on the business to make shorter
term decisions because of something
that's happening that may be outside of
our control. What does moat mean? For
us, moat is what we consider, you know,
a competitive advantage. And the simple
example of like why a moat is it's a
castle, right? Do you have a castle that
is a strong business, and then the moat
you want to have around is what defends
the castle and what is going to protect
the castle. A wide moat is going to
protect a castle more, a narrow moat is
going to protect it less. A moat can be
driven by different dynamics. It might
be you have a brand and a channel that
in combination allow you to sort of keep
customers out of your business. You
might have a competitive position that
allows you to be the low-cost provider
that then allows you to sort of attract
customers and get route density in your
market and then drive down prices
further and costs further, which then
allow you to attract more customers. And
that will keep other people out of your
business. There's lots of different
types of moats. There's network effect,
there's unlimited supplier power,
customers or a concentration that can
limit or expand your moat. But we're
really focusing on how do we build a
business that keeps competitors or new
entrants out as effectively as possible.
We find that moats are changing every
day. And some businesses that used to
have amazing moats, like newspapers, now
have eroded quite considerably. And
there's other businesses where the moats
are getting stronger. So, trying to find
those businesses where we think we can
expand the moat. Where do you think
moats are getting stronger? It's hard,
you know, in the moment to look and say
this moat is getting stronger cuz
typically it's easier to look back over
the course of 10 years, the moat has
gotten better or gotten worse. I think
AI is a good example of that. Probably
will erode a lot of moats in a lot of
industries and businesses because it
reduces the friction or the cost for a
new entrant to come in. And, you know,
they can navigate the space more
effectively. I do think there probably
will be a subset of businesses where AI
actually makes their moat stronger. And
because they already have some sort of
structured system that is allowing them
to have a competitive advantage. And so,
it might be, you know, maybe they built
out a sales force with a technician base
that is hard to replicate and for
someone else to come into that. And now
AI allows them to quote more effectively
or reduce their costs or improve their
productivity so that then their costs go
down. And if their costs go down, then
they can pass that on to the customer
and sort of cycle that into keeping more
customers more effectively. I think it
probably is a little early in the
context of AI to say, "Okay, who's going
to be the biggest winner, who's going to
be the biggest loser?" because it's a
little bit more of a crap shoot at this
stage, I'd say. I've been thinking about
that a little bit recently. There's a
lot of service businesses where AI could
with somebody with a background with AI
who has an a reflexive AI mindset could
come in and probably lower costs and
create a temporary advantage over the
next, I don't know, three to five years,
but then you could use that to create
this flywheel of pricing power with
customers and in the sense of giving
better pricing so you're always booked,
but also in terms of, oh, we can acquire
businesses at the same multiple and get
a way better return than other people.
Yeah. And I think probably the biggest
question on my mind is, you know, how
temporary is it and how quick is it?
Will just it'll be a race to the bottom
where now prices will just go down and
then other entrants will come into the
market and all the customers will
capture the value versus the companies?
Or do you already have a moat or can you
build a moat in a in a time where it
actually allows you to sustain it and
then you ultimately get a stronger
business? And that's I think is
interesting. We're spending some time
thinking about that as well and
especially in the service businesses.
And I think there are some that it's
just harder for new entrant to come in.
If it's a regulated space where you have
to get credentialed and and there's
limited number of credentials, that's
harder for someone to come in. If it's,
you you have a huge sales force that or
and service force that's going out and
implementing and supporting your
customers, that's harder for someone
else to come and replicate. Not
impossible, but harder. And so, do you
have that aspect of your moat already
that you can reinforce and what does
that look like? But I think the
disruption's coming, you know, it's I
think it's going to happen pretty widely
in terms of different businesses and
industries. So, if you have a great
business today, are you thinking about
that and can you reinforce your moat to
make it stronger? When it comes to
quantitative assessment of these
businesses, what are you looking at?
Yeah, in essence we're looking at like a
return on invested capital.
Um and when as we think about that, is
it going up, is it going down? Is it
staying the same? Do we think that that
is reasonable for the space? What we
find is that's one part of it. Like you
need to understand the quantitative and
typically if you have a moat you can see
it. You can see it in your returns in
the business on what you're doing and
you your return on capital.
But beyond the quantitative is then the
qualitative. You is like can you define
it? Can you explain why you understand
it? That I think becomes more important
because if you looked at the newspapers,
I would say once the moat started to
erode quantitatively it still looked
good for quite a period of time even
though qualitatively it was starting to
erode at that stage. The financials
lagged and then it caught up, but I
think that's typically what we're trying
to do is look at both the quantitative
and the qualitative side. And when it
comes to return on invested capital,
what is that? For us it's really looking
at you what's the earnings in the
business and then what's the capital
required in the business to support
those earnings. And so you can do the
calculation and get a ratio. We
typically say like an okay business is
maybe 20% return on capital. A great
business is probably looking at 50% plus
in terms of return on capital. And when
you say earnings like there's a lot of
ways that people are defining that now
between EBIT, EBITDA,
operating earnings. Like what is
earnings? We usually look at EBIT or you
know earnings before interest and taxes.
Our view on sort of EBITDA is there's
some industries where it makes sense
because but in most industries
depreciation and amortization is real.
And so if you focus on that, I think you
sometimes
give yourself false confidence in terms
of what the business really looks like
and what it really generates because
you're not since you're trying to get a
proxy for cash cash flow and cash
generation. So when we look at it, we'll
look usually look at EBIT as sort of
earnings approach and then we'll focus
in terms of what's the capital in the
business. But earnings we usually define
as EBIT. In some cases we'll look at
EBITDA, but we try to be pretty
selective of how we do that in the
industries where depreciation and
amortization are real. And how are you
defining capital? Is that just equity?
In capital we're looking at a few
different things. What's the capital
actually required in the business? So
what you're putting into it, you your
PP&E, if you need like lots of AR to
support your business, really trying to
fundamentally understand what capital's
required to support this business. What
inventory's required to support the
business.
Every business looks a little bit
different, but there might be a business
where the earnings look really great,
but then they have a huge inventory down
their balance sheet to support that that
level of earnings and then that business
is probably a little less like a less
good business because you have to have
this inventory to support it. And that
sometimes maybe you have a lot of
locations, so you need to have
facilities with all the inventory. And
maybe your customers require you to have
a lot of inventory to support the
business. There's a lot of different
dynamics that
you've play into that, but we're really
trying to understand what capital's
required to support the level of
earnings that you have in this business.
Your best businesses usually don't
require a lot of capital. There are
caveats to that too. I mean you you can
get a higher return on capital, but also
potentially someone can enter the
business more quickly if you don't have
capital in the business. If you have
capital in your business, that's usually
harder for someone to enter, but you can
get other types of moats or impacts. And
I think you're seeing a shift in this.
If you look at the tech businesses
historically, there wasn't a lot of
capital required. Google or others they
had network effect and these other
dynamics that drove the moat. And so you
didn't have capital. Now with AI that's
shifting quite considerably,
but also that probably makes it harder
for someone else to come into the
business as well. And when you look at
market, what makes an attractive market?
So when we look at market, you we're
looking for a few things. One is what's
it growing? What's the growth rate in
it? Is it growing at GDP? Is it growing
above GDP? Do we think that that's
sustaining? You there might be a
situation where the business is growing
very industry or the market's growing
very fast right now, but year it's going
to decline over the next 5 years or no
we think it's going to continue to grow
at 20% plus a year for 10 plus years. So
trying to understand what the growth
rate is. How's it relate to GDP? Second
we're trying to understand what are the
dynamics of the market. Is it a
situation where there's a lot of
fragmented players? Is there you know a
couple behemoths? Is it one where
there's opportunity for consolidation or
not? We're trying to just understand
what the dynamics are and sort of how it
works. Are the other players in the
market rational? If it's you know more
concentrated,
what are how do we think about the path
forward and what that might look like
and where do we think we would play in
that market and what do we think the
path forward be? But we're first
starting with sort of growth rate and
dynamics. We've already talked a little
bit about management and I
I think most of our listeners will
understand a little bit of margin of
safety enough for the conversation
anyway. What did you mean by more
potential? Is that like a lottery
ticket?
>> No, it's less a lottery ticket, but
really like where's the opportunity to
sort of grow this business and what does
it look like? So for example, we
partnered with a company Marine Concepts
sells boat covers. When we partnered
with the company and started by
gentleman Randy Kent based at a Lake of
the Ozarks, he had a facility and a
market in Lake of the Ozarks. He had
great market share there, great NPS. The
product was incredibly
you know strong. He'd moved a little bit
and sold some in Florida, but really he
hadn't expanded beyond that. So the more
potential there was can we take this
company that has a great product, has a
great reputation, great NPS, great
margins and expand it? And in this case
we wanted to build out a dealer network.
So can we expand that through a dealer
network and growth? So that was the more
potential in that business was how do we
expand it and doing something that
they're not doing today versus a
business where you may come in and it's
already at full potential, right? The
business is operating super well, not as
many growth drivers or growth
opportunities left where what are you
going to go do? Like it's growing at GDP
probably. Like it's going to be hard to
really go accelerate growth in Coke.
Whereas for us our playing in the
mid-size market there's a lot more
opportunity. Or JM Test that was a
40-year-old business that we partnered
with. Family business started by the
Morrison family. Grew 20% a year over
the last 20 years in sort of 10 branches
and regions today, but an opportunity to
move in geographically into new regions,
increase penetration in our existing
markets, and then three look at
potential acquisitions for other family
businesses that want a long-term
partner. And so for us that was the more
potential in that business. So each
business is a bit different, but really
understanding what's not being sort of
fully optimized today. We always start
with sort of our purpose which is
helping organizations and people reach
their full potential. And so as we think
about a new partnership, how do we think
about what that full potential may be
and then what's what's the opportunity
for us to help get help them get there?
And do we bring some sort of skill set,
experience, perspective that can help
accelerate that? And when you look at
sort of the potential, does that factor
into the margin of safety or no that's
like in addition to your we're going to
have a margin of safety anyway. This is
more like an added layer to that. I
think if we think of this is like a
growth potential, but it may contribute
to margins of safety. If we said you if
this business will work at this
valuation even if we don't do anything
and then we're able to go drive this
growth, then that gives us more comfort
in the margin of safety and where where
we are. But
they can be interconnected, but it's not
necessarily have to be. And so what
happens? What's the playbook post close?
So you you've found a company, you love
the management team, you love the
people. It's in a great market. You
think there's potential for more. Day
one, now what?
>> Actually before even day one, like when
we close during the process where we're
getting to know each other, we're doing
diligence. We're sort of spending time
with them really understanding what are
their views on the industry? What are
their views on the business? What does
management think the biggest
opportunities are? We're oftentimes
doing interviews. So our Camber business
system team will spend time meeting with
70, 75 people in the business and
understanding where they think the
opportunities are as well. So we're
doing that during that sort of diligence
process going up to the close. Once we
close with a business, we're really
trying to understand where they on their
own journey. And so we have a diagnostic
to assess on all these frameworks,
people, attracting talent, developing
talent, engaging talent, strategy, KPIs,
budgets. What's their self diagnostic on
their sort of sophistication in these
areas? And so they'll do that and then
we'll do that and then we'll come in and
say, okay, given this, what what do we
want to go build together? What does it
look like? There's a few sort of
critical components of the initial
partnership that we do. Usually it's a
part of a strategic planning process.
Our KBS team will come in and work with
the management team to sort of really
think about what's the future direction
of the business and what are the
opportunities? What are we doing well
today? Where are there opportunities
we're not you know doing as well today?
Where can we sort of grow? Where are the
challenges facing the business? So
having those types of conversations. And
that really is a collaborative and you
hands-on experience that we're
partnering with them to assess. As we're
doing that, we're simultaneously saying,
okay, do we have the right capabilities?
Do we have the right roles? Do we have
the right people to help support that
growth? If we say you we want to go
expand it in a new markets, you do we
have that capability? Do we if we want
to go do acquisitions, do we have that
capability? If not, how do we build that
capability or add that talent internally
that allows us to have that sort of
flexibility? And then we're really
building a road map out for the first 12
to 18 months. Okay, what are we going to
go do together and what does that look
like? We say from our perspective, you
know, I've been CEO, my partner's been
CFO. We don't want to be the CEO and CFO
again. We're not trying to do your job.
We're trying to be the resource that we
wanted. And so we're being helpful on
the biggest strategic decisions you're
making in a business and really
partnering with them and then giving
them feedback and help along the way in
those critical areas. Talk to me a
little bit more about that in the sense
of you're the the owner now and you have
a CEO, founder who's run the company
successfully,
and
you're not telling them what to do, but
you're nudging? Like, how does that
work?
>> think of it as like co-creation. So,
they have a view, they're going to be
smarter about the industry than we we
ever will. They'll have the depth of
knowledge, experience, what's worked,
what hasn't worked. What we'll bring is
outside perspective and a lot of
questions. And so, we'll say, "Have you
thought about this? Or what about that?
Or hey, there's an industry that's like
this that you we've seen that 10 years
ago this happened, and it looks like it
might be similar. What might be similar
or different?" So, we're trying to do
that together in partnership with them
so that we could co-create and get to a
shared vision of the world and what we
want to go build and what that looks
like. And so, in essence, we think of it
as like we're their strategic partner in
assessing that. And then once we've
assessed that, we sort of come in and
help them with sort of the skills and
frameworks to go do it. So, for example,
we have someone on our team who really
specializes in sort of KPIs and the
budgeting process. So, he's going to
help them implement a KPI process if
they don't have one already. To say,
"Okay, how do you build KPIs? What do
good KPIs look like? What are the
important drivers in this business? What
are the right benchmarks? You know, how
aggressive do you want to be or not?"
And so, we're helping them think through
that. On the budgeting or we sort of
think of it as resource allocation side,
do we have the right resources to sort
of fund our future growth and what we
want to go do? Um how do we become more
efficient in in some areas so that we
can go invest in other areas? So, we're
helping do that. Or we have someone on
our people team who's going in on the
people side and saying, "Okay, we
understand that uh we need to to drive
this growth in the business. We want to
drive this growth. Okay, what are the
mission-critical roles that we have
today? Do we have the right skills in
those roles and the right like people in
those roles? If not, what changes might
we need to make? And then, oh wow, we're
going to really need to engage our
middle-level management if we're going
to go grow and expand. Do we have the
right you development for them? Okay, we
need to be implementing quarterly
director days with that group so that we
can help them become, you know, better
leaders so that they can help us at this
new stage of growth. Or you perhaps we
haven't done a lot on the engagement or
communication side. And we need to
implement quarterly town halls where
we're helping the company understand the
vision and the strategy and direction so
that we can help accelerate growth so
that everyone feels they understand the
vision, they're bought into what we're
trying to go do, and they want to sort
of help us at that next phase. And when
you say KBS, you mean the Cambrek
Business System?
>> Correct. And these are all the
components of it that we're talking
about now. Why come up with a repeatable
system? And is it similar to the Danaher
one or different? Can maybe give me a
little bit of compare and contrast.
>> I was CEO, I wanted to go out and learn
from others. And what I found was some
of the best companies out there have a
scalable repeatable business system.
Danaher, Marmon, Toyota. It is an
integrated way of how they manage the
business so that it's not piecemeal, but
really it's a holistic approach where
the components of the approach reinforce
each other. And if you do one in
isolation, you get less value than if
you do them together and they're
complementary in nature. And so, you
could have a strategy process, but if
you don't have the right people and the
right skills, you're going to be less
effective at implementing that strategic
process. If you have amazing people and
a great culture and great environment,
but you don't have KPIs in alignment,
you're not going to be able to achieve
as much with those people. So, by adding
these different components and focusing
on what matters most in a business, you
create more value overall. And I think,
you know, there's amazing examples,
Danaher being one, of that's created
tremendous value by having a structured
systematized way of managing a business.
And what we found is that most mid-size
companies they're struggling with the
same things. How do I get the right
people in the right seats? How do I
build the right culture and right
engagement? How do I get the right
strategy without, you you paying
McKinsey or Bain to help me? How do I go
and execute that strategy and drive
accountability and action into the
businesses? And so, what we're trying to
do is saying, "Rather than you have to
go figure that out, we've done the work
to say, hey, here are the structured
ways to go do it, and this is the
sequencing that works for where you are
in your business that we can help you
with." And so, that very much has been
our approach to how we think about it um
with our business system. And what we
did is we went and learned from some of
those best out there, from Danaher, from
Marmon, from um Constellation and
others, and sort of took parts of each
that we liked, where we thought that
they were the most successful, and sort
of took those and distilled them into
our own business system. Ours probably
has more of a focus on people um and
culture than others do, but I think
that's a function of where the world is
today and compared to 20 or 30 years ago
where a lot of those um business systems
were started. And but it has similar
approaches in terms of continuous
improvement or strategic planning or
KPIs that many business systems have.
And we feel like, you know, we're
standing on the shoulders of those
giants who've done a great job of
building them, and we can enhance them
and tailor them for sort of our types of
businesses. Why do you think more people
don't copy the Danaher Business System?
I mean, a great recent example of that
is uh Larry Culp using it to turn around
GE. Yeah. Uh it's a proven system, it's
successful, it probably takes a couple
years to implement, I would imagine,
throughout the organization, but it
works. So, I think more people don't do
it because it's really, really hard. It
requires extensive discipline and
structure and focus and adherence to the
system for it to work. You can't just do
a piece of it or one part or for 6
months, and you actually have to have it
become part of the DNA and the culture
of the business. So, I think in
longer-term like holds, people don't do
it because the discipline. I think in
shorter-term holds, if you are, you
know, private equity,
you you don't have the time period to
get the benefits of doing it, and so why
would you spend 2 years going and
implementing something that you're not
going to probably reap the full benefit
in year three or year four when you need
to exit the business. And so, for us,
having a longer-term horizon, we can
invest in that and we see the value of
it um and we have the team to help
support the discipline and the adherence
to it. I also think a lot of investors
haven't actually been operators, and so
it's really hard to go into a business
and say, "This is what you should go do
to operate a business" if you've never
actually operated a business. And so,
you're you probably don't have the same
insights or the value of that or
understand the value of it. And you
might have an operating team who's, you
know, doing it for you, but, you know,
usually a lot of firms the operating
teams are second-class citizens where
they're not at the same seat of the
table as the investing organization. So,
you started KBS in 2020. Mhm.
What's changed over the 5 years? What
have you learned from implementing this
over the last half decade? Yeah, so um
we we actually started when we were at
Pampered Chef, right? That were the fund
foundational pieces where we were
learning and trying things, and then we
formally sort of codified it when we
started Cambrek in 2020. It has changed
a lot, and it gets better every year and
every season and every business we work
in. And we think of it as this it's
living and breathing, it's not a
stagnant system you go and implement and
then you forget about it. It really is
focused on continuous improvement, and
each company we engage with helps us get
better at it. But the mistakes um that
we learned from started very early on.
So, when we were at Pampered Chef, we
first rolled out KPIs, um we rolled out
KPIs to the entire organization. And we
said, "Okay, great, we're going to do
KPIs, we're going to roll it out in 500
employees, we'll roll it out to
everybody." And that was a huge mistake.
You know, we just it was too fast, and
the organization wasn't ready. Um they
you we should have started and sequenced
it and started just with the executive
team in year one. Once you have the
executive team understanding, aligned,
working towards it, then you go to the
next level, and then ultimately you go
to the next level. We thought we could
move faster and just roll it out cuz it
was a small business. You know, related
to that, when we rolled out our KPIs,
we're like, "Okay, great, you have KPIs,
go figure them out." And what we we
thought was like employees will figure
out how to go do it. Well, it turns out
you have to help people, and you have to
understand problem-solving and help them
understand how do I go solve the KPI?
Just because you give me a KPI doesn't
mean I actually understand how do I go
drive it. It doesn't mean I'm not
capable or I can't figure it out, but
it's going to be much more effective if
I give you problem-solving training,
help you have some case studies and
examples of what this looks like in
action. On the people side, when we
first started, we rolled out 360-degree
feedback in year one. And what we found
with 360-degree feedback, where people
get feedback from not just their
manager, but peers as well as direct
reports, is that you're in an
organization where you don't have trust
or psychological safety, it doesn't
work. Um you know, the feedback isn't
very good, it's shallow, people are
defensive, people attack, like it's not
productive or constructive feedback. So,
in doing that, what we realized was,
"Okay, organizations aren't ready for
this in terms of people in year one. We
need to build up to it. We need to build
communication and engagement in the
organization and transparency. We need
to show them that we're going to, you
know, do this first. We need to explain
why we're doing development. It's not
to, you exit people, it's to help them
in terms of their career progression."
And so, by learning those things along
the way, we get better at what we're
doing. In the recent years, we've
realized this more simple, like clear,
less um as concise as possible. Dawson
Chambliss, who leads our KBS team, is
terrific He's just a natural learner and
working on improving the system. And
after each partnership, we reflect and
say, "Okay, what went well? What could
have gone better? What do we think needs
to shift and alter?" And it's also
great, we'll go into businesses and we
learn of what they're doing really well.
And we're like, "Oh wow, they actually
do that better than us. Okay, can we
tweak this? Or you can we utilize them?"
And we see it in our community, too, the
group of 3,000 owner CEOs. We learn from
them of how they're navigating these
types of topics, and that helps us get
better as well. I love the idea of the
the community. There's, you know, I
think you had mentioned they're sort of
like accelerators for
uh startup companies, but there's no
real accelerators or network for uh
mid-size businesses. Yeah, my view is
that mid-size companies are in this
middle
um sort of gap area. On the smaller
side, there's startups have
accelerators, they have different
programs. They your companies have more
resources. They can bring in a
consulting firm or someone to help them
or pay for a resource on a specific
topic. If you're in the middle, you're
constrained by resources typically, both
time, people, and dollars. And so, but
you have many of the same challenges to
figure out and to navigate. And so, we
built the Cambre community for what we
wanted, which was resources and people
to learn from that have done this and
have made mistakes and learned and
gotten better. And by bringing those
people together, we're sharing our own
resources and content and perspective
and experience, but also other people in
the community are sharing theirs as
well. And so, that sort of shared
ecosystem of learning, improving,
getting better, um has made you everyone
in the community participates better in
their businesses, but also um helps us
as well. And then, how do you think
about that when you take over a company?
Yeah, so we're pretty conservative. Um
so, um back to that margin of safety, we
believe if everything has to go well and
to be you to be successful in the
business, that makes us nervous. And
leverage is one of those things that you
the more leverage you put on the
business, the more everything has to go
well for that to to be able to service
that. So, maybe a traditional private
equity might put four to six times the
leverage on a business, we'll probably
do two or three times. We might also use
a term of a like a seller note where the
seller is helping finance um that, which
is a little bit more friendly than bank
debt or some other debt option. And so,
we're in general a little bit more
conservative. Our view is that leverage
amplifies returns on the upside, but
also on the downside. And so, we want to
have a bit more margin of safety. We
don't want to put the company at risk.
We don't want to push ourselves to make
short-term decisions because of a
structural decision that maybe juice
returns a little bit, but isn't actually
what we think is best for the business.
I have a hunch, maybe correct me if I'm
wrong, but when you're buying these
businesses, they don't have a lot of
debt on them. No, typically not. Most
entrepreneurs we meet
at some point had some moment in their
business where it was a bet the business
type situation and often times that
might have been leverage or something
else where they almost lost the whole
business. And when you have those
situations you've gone through,
typically as an entrepreneur, you're
like, I don't ever want to be there
again. So, I'm not going to ever put
myself at risk. And so, often times I
think some mid-size companies are
actually you you almost debt too debt
adverse where you they won't even have
you a mortgage on a property or you use
financing on um an area where it might
actually be prudent um and they'd be
more inclined to take equity or more
expensive capital or not use you know,
the capital options they have because
they're so afraid of something bad
happening. And it typically is stemming
from something bad happened at some
stage and they almost lost their
business and they don't want to be ever
close to that again, which we can
respect and we understand. You know, if
you have a great business, you don't
want to put yourself in a situation
where your business is at risk because
of a capital financing decision.
>> You guys have embraced AI internally at
Cambre. How are you using it?
>> Yeah, so we think of AI in three
different ways. One is at Cambre, how do
we become use it um and ultimately
become smarter, more efficient, more
productive in our own processes and how
we operate. And so, that's everything
from you we use it for better note
taking, um research on businesses, um
moving faster as we sort of deep dive in
a space and getting smarter um as we
think about uh the businesses more
holistically, we definitely are using
it. The second way we're thinking about
it is what are the industries and
businesses where
AI will affect the industry and
potentially strengthen the moat as we
sort of talked about a bit earlier. And
um are there spaces that we think are
attractive? So, looking in sort of what
we call sort of AI enabled services,
businesses where we think it can
strengthen the moat of the business.
That we're still earlier stages on
because I think there's a lot of
uncertainty of what it happens in
different businesses, but we're spending
time thinking about that. And then, the
third is in our companies. And in our
companies, there's two I think main ways
we think it can be helpful. One is just
structured way to help our businesses
think about the key management aspects
where they can be more effective. So,
example would be hiring. We have a
hiring process, we have a structured um
you you do a scorecard and you do this
in terms of sourcing and then you do
this in terms of selection and an
interview process. And if you do this,
you know, it will improve your odds of
success. But it's very hard to be
disciplined to it because it takes time
and it takes you requiring um to step
back and think about it. You need to
build a case study, you need to do all
of these things. And so, can we build a
hiring tool that takes away some of the
work required that allows you to still
adhere to the process with discipline,
but not all the time to build the
process. So, can we build a scorecard
for a role more effectively? Can we pull
from other similar type roles and
pre-populate it and make you a little
bit more efficient as a hiring manager?
So, we're spending time on AI on topics
like that that will affect every
business. And then, we're spending time
on you know, can we think about our
productive like workflows in our
business and how do we be more
effective? I think people are starting
with like the simple stuff like how do I
become more efficient or can I think
about my call center? But we're thinking
probably more on the revenue generating
side. Uh can we quote you can right now
we have a business that takes 48 hours
to quote. Can we get that down to 48
minutes um what without sacrificing
quality um by utilizing AI more
effectively? Um are there other
workflows like that on sort of the sales
or marketing or um productivity side
where we can significantly improve um
how we are engaging with customers or
making decisions or speeding up things
that will then allow us to attract more
customers or service our customers
better. And so, that's the third aspect
that we're working on. When it comes to
hiring, like what does that process look
like? Like what does that nitty-gritty
look like in the details you've
uh you guys have recently hired a new
CEO for one of the companies you had.
What is that process like?
>> Yeah, so um we very much subscribe to
the Who process so by Geoff Smart. Um
there's a book called Who, w h o. It is
I think single-handedly the best simple
book on hiring. And if you read that
book, almost everyone will become a
better hiring manager. And there's a few
components to it and we've augmented in
and added our own, but the first is
building a really in-depth scorecard for
the role. Most people completely skip
this process. They just jump to I'm
going to write a JD, I'm going to post
the role, I'm going to start
interviewing, and then I'll sort of
figure it out. And people usually do
that because you're in pain. You're
trying to fill a role and you you don't
have someone in the role or um you don't
have the right person and so, you just
want to get going. And we always say by
doing that, you may save your time
today, but you're going to lose time
down the road because you're not aligned
with your counterparts on it, you don't
market to the right people, you don't
interview the right candidates, or you
you hire the wrong person and then
you've got to exit that person and you
lose lots of time and money in doing
that. So, how do you actually start up
front and get aligned and get clarity on
what you need in the role? And so, a
good scorecard in my our mind has three
sort of critical components. The first
is what's the mission of the role? And
so, really clearly, what are you going
to go drive in this role? And how do you
make it like specific? You want it time
bound, you want a as as like
as measurable as possible. So, if you're
hiring a VP of sales, you might say, we
want to double revenue over 3 years by
improving um our industrial account
management and adding large industrial
contracts. And we want to build a team
of you
farmers or we want to build a team of
hunters, whatever it may be. And by
doing that, what do you want to achieve?
What's the time you want to achieve it?
And some level of the how. And the how
is important because sales leaders are
very different. Like if you're going to
sell through Amazon, you probably need a
different sales leader than if you're
going to sell direct or if you're going
to sell through large customers. And so,
can you are you clearly articulating
what you need? So, that mission's
important. The second is the outcomes.
So, three to five really clear outcomes
of what you're going to go drive. So,
that might be growth in revenue, but it
also might be we need to grow margin or
we need to you improve from four
national accounts to 10. Whatever the
outcomes are that you need for that role
as clear and crisp as possible.
And then, the third are competencies.
And what are the competencies needed for
this role? We think of competencies on
two levels. One is functional. So,
there's some roles where you you need a
certain type of competency. So, you
might need analytical or you might need
relationship based, whatever it is for
that role. And then, there's company to
be cultural competencies. We need
everyone to be humble or open to
feedback or aggressive, whatever it is
for your business. And so, the scorecard
is putting those things together. The
hiring manager puts those together and
then shares that with their
counterparts. And so, other
stakeholders. And then, you beat it up.
And what you'll find is people will say,
"Whoa, you think we need to grow through
national accounts? I think we should be
going to mom and pops." And that
conversation is had early in the process
where you can get alignment, have
disagreement, but then move forward on
what you want to go do. Once you have
that scorecard, then you the hiring
manager or the recruiter or the search
firm know like, "Okay, this is what the
person needs to go do. I can find people
who can go do this. I can build a JD
that's going to market to people who
want to go do this. And I can more
clearly articulate it." And then, that
scorecard then flows through the
interview process. And now I have know
how to interview. So, that's the first
component is the scorecard.
The second component is the sourcing.
And so, most sourcing in most companies
is very reactive. You know, I I post the
job and people apply. And my view is
like often times the people applying are
always the people you want, right?
They're the people usually who don't
have a job or are unsatisfied in their
job. Often times your best performers
are happy in their job and they're doing
really well. And so, you need to go find
those people. And so, having the hiring
manager or the recruiter reaching out
and taking ownership of that to actually
find the people that you want to have
and not just waiting for people to come
to you. So, really diving into more
specifics of how do you go source? And
then the third is around selection and
how do you improve your selection
process? And this is what most people
think about when they think about hiring
is the selection part. Our selection has
a few different sort of components to
it. So, the first is actually like the
hiring manager. We do a screen with a
recruiter, but then the hiring manager
going deep on different areas that we
think are important in the role from the
scorecard. So, the outcomes,
um, the competencies in that first
interview. And then actually have an
interview panel that have different
people interviewing different areas. So,
what we find most interviews start with
like, "Tell me a little bit about
yourself." And you know, "Tell me about
your background." And then 20 minutes
later, then you've had that same
conversation or that candidate had that
same conversation with three or four
different people versus saying, you
know, "Your job is to interview on uh
outcomes and all you're going to focus
on are these outcomes. Your job's to
focus on functional competencies. All
you're going to focus on is are they
analytical if that's what you're looking
for?" Right. relationship base. And then
the um one person focusing on cultural
and like and your interview comes in,
you're not worried about what their past
role is or how competent they are in
terms of the outcomes, you're worried
about their culture.
And so, having the interview set up from
that. And then we augment those
interviews with a behavioral assessment.
So, we usually do behavioral and
cognitive, which we think helps us
better understand some of the cultural
and aptitude aspects. We usually do a
case study, which is a deep dive on real
topics that we're facing. And then we
usually do a top grading interview,
which is a in-depth usually 90 minutes
to 3-hour interview where we're going
through every past role that they've
done. What were the outcomes or the
scope of responsibility? How did they
perform? What would their manager say
about them? Those types of
conversations. So, it's a pretty
in-depth process been followed based on
sort of who, but it significantly
improves your outcome of success. What
are the businesses you're not interested
in acquiring is insurance. I'd love to
hear more about that. Yeah, I think
there's a lot of industries we don't
invest in, healthcare, financials,
insurance, real estate. Typically, we
want to focus on what's our circle of
competence. Where uh do we think we have
new value and expertise that's going to
enhance what we're doing? So, we focus
on services, industrials, consumer, um
both by our background, but also where
we think there's attractive
opportunities. Insurance is a you can be
a really good business, but a lot of
capital has come into it in the last 15
years. And so, it probably is a more
competitive business. Um there's more
risk in it than there has been and there
probably will be times where it's a
really good business, but there'll be
times where there's more capital, so the
pricing gets less disciplined and then
it ends up being less attractive of a
business. There are other dynamics that
are attractive like if we ever found,
you know, the perfect insurance
business, it's not saying we wouldn't do
it, um but it's probably not a focus for
us for those dynamics in the fact that
where we are playing, there's a lot of
opportunity. And so, there's just more
there than we see sort of possible in
insurance or some of these other and
some of them are just more complex, the
risk are higher. If you misprice an
insurance, you don't understand your
costs for a long time, but it can, you
know, be very very difficult to an
organization and you can erode, you
know, all your profits if you misprice.
You've been on a lot of boards, so
you've been on the Dairy Queen board,
John Mansville, Kraft Heinz.
I would love to hear about what you've
learned from those experiences and then
how you took that and you're applying
that now at Camp Bow. Yeah, so I'd say,
you know, each board I've been on I've
learned different things, um
both in terms of what to do, sometimes
what not to do. And some of them have
been unique where, you know, it was the
CEO reporting to me directly and not a
formal board and other times a more
formal public board or private board.
And what I find is for the most part,
most boards don't add a lot of value to
the businesses and I think they
oftentimes go too deep on areas that are
less critical and not enough time on the
areas that are most critical that they
can provide the most value. So, within
each business really understanding what
are the, you know, three to five big
levers that are going to shift and
create the most value in this business
and how do you spend your time talking
about those levers versus all the
smaller things that might be urgent,
they might be happening, they may be
important, but they're not going to
fundamentally change the direction of
the business. And so, I think the best
boards figure out what those are, focus
on them and drive conversation around
them and then provide insights or value
to the management team. I think most
management teams would come out of most
board meetings and say that wasn't a
good use of my time cuz I was just
updating and telling them what I did,
you know, for the last quarter or
whatever it may be versus more
forward-thinking, this is what I'm
struggling with. And most boards don't
have the context in the business enough
to be able to add value. So, how do you
make sure the board is knowledgeable
enough about the business and can also
ask the right questions even if they're
not going to be as deep as the CEO or
the management team. And I think it's a
fine line of, you know, getting that
right balance, but those are some of the
things that I've learned as I've thought
about different boards and how we think
about our boards. And do you think the
role of the board is different in public
companies versus private companies?
Yes and no. I mean, absolutely like
there's a public dynamic where you have
a fiduciary responsibility, there's a
enhanced governance, um and some other
dynamics that are important and, you
know, regulated in terms of where you
need to spend your time. I think there's
some that's less valuable, earnings and
quarterly reports. I think that's
probably less valuable to value creation
in the business. I think on the private
side, people set up their boards in
different ways. Sometimes it's set up
more as governance and oversight and
shareholder um you know, management.
Other times it's set up more as advisory
or insights and I think different
private boards do it differently. I
think our view is that um you probably
um want somewhere in the middle where
you're having some governance, but at
Camp Bow we provide most of that, but
really it's the valuable insights,
perspective, relationships,
introductions that are going to create
the most value that we want our boards
focused on. Is there a moment without
naming the company where you were in a
board meeting and you were just taken
back by what was happening or no?
>> Like in a bad way? Yeah.
>> Yeah, I mean, many of them. Uh and some
of them good boards, but I remember
there was a uh board meeting we were in
and we were like assessing the packaging
of the products and, you know, in
detail, which I think that's very
important. The packaging of the product
is very important. I don't know if the
board is the best people to be assessing
and commenting on the packaging of a
business. Like I think that's what, you
know, the the management team and the
marketers should be doing. And I think
those are, you know, conversations you
have to be like thoughtful about. Or,
you know, you're on in a slide deck and
it's slide 112 and, you know, you're
being read the slides and like really,
like this is how we're going to use this
time? Like I don't think any slide deck
should be 112 for a board. I mean,
usually there's 20 slides maybe that get
to the heart of the most important
topics you're facing at a time. And then
most of the time should be discussion
and not presentations. Not a dog and
pony of show, but I think it's set up
typically for the management team to
come up and say all the things that
we've done and how smart we are and how
talented we are and how you should be
applauding us. And the board, you know,
is doing that on the other side versus
that. What's going to create the most
value versus, hey, these are the three
biggest issues we're facing right now.
This is what we're struggling with. This
is what we need your help with and this
is what we want your perspective and
insights on. Now, that's a completely
different dynamic. You need to have
psychological safety, you need to have
trust, you need the management team to
be open to receive the feedback, you
need to have board members who are
capable of providing valuable feedback.
You need all of those dynamics to to
come together. You mentioned Katharine
Graham and her biography earlier. I want
to circle back to this cuz it just
brought back a little bit of a memory
uh and it involves Buffett, but it was
interesting. She had mentioned
something, if I can get this right,
where
he had brought all these annual reports
to her and he was teaching her sort of
like the financial aspect of running the
Washington Post.
And one of the things he mentioned that
stood out to me was he was just showing
her a balance sheet over 5-year or
10-year period of time. What can you
learn from a balance sheet, just a pure
balance sheet over that period of time?
What insights do you get?
>> you can see a lot in a balance sheet.
You can see how much inventory do you
have? You can see what capital is
required. You can see are your accounts
receivables like are they going up? Are
they going down? Like there's a lot of
insights that you can see from all three
financial statements and then as you if
you start to understand the business
drivers of the business, you can
understand this as well. And I think
what you typically you'll see is that
most leaders
don't always I think we assume they
understand all of that in a business and
I think some do and understand it
fundamentally really well, some
understand it, you know, tactically
well. Sometimes people understand it in
their like in practice, but not
necessarily the theoretical like how it
actually works.
And you when I think it's really
valuable though for your leaders and not
to assume your leaders understand all of
that because some people are more
financially literate or financially like
have more financial acumen than others.
And it doesn't mean they can't learn it,
but if you equip them with those skills,
they're going to be better.
If you think about a CEO, for example,
oftentimes CEOs are great operators.
They usually have come from sales or
marketing or operations.
They seldom come from finance and it's
not usually the the career trajectory.
And so, have they actually learned those
aspects and where along the way did they
learn them and do they understand?
And oftentimes in a business, you're
making really important operational
decisions, but you're also making really
important capital allocation decisions.
And you can really
uh ruin a good business with poor
capital allocation decisions. And we
think of big ones, acquisitions being
the biggest where we destroy value often
by acquiring in business that isn't a
very good business or paying the wrong
valuation for it. But there's capital
allocation decisions every day in a
business. You should we invest in this
factory? Should we open this
distribution center? Should we move into
this new market? Um we think of hiring
with the same level of complexity. Like
you know, it's not a capex decision, but
if you thought about it as a capex
decision, if you're going to hire
someone for 100 grand, right? Uh a year,
and you think that you discount the
value of that, like you know, it's a
million-dollar investment that you're
making in that person. If you're you can
fire them, but you probably won't.
They'll stay at the organization. So do
you have that same level of discipline
and rigor in your decision-making on all
those types of topics. And CEOs who are
more equipped at like fundamentally
understanding capital allocation usually
can make better decisions in their
businesses. Now, a lot of entrepreneurs,
they do that instinctively. They've had
to do it and they figure it out, but
sometimes
just taking a step back and helping a
leader, making sure a leader understands
it. When I started as CEO, we took all
of our leaders through a business driver
meeting and training that we did once a
year, which was what are the business
drivers? Let's go through an income
statement and let's understand what are
all the components of an income
statement. And we just did it for
everybody just because it's also
something that people assume they should
know. And so if they don't, they
oftentimes feel embarrassed or they
don't feel like they should ask.
>> Right. And so we would go through it and
explain what everything is because
ultimately
finance is just a vocabulary and a
language that you people if explained to
can understand, but if you've never been
explained to it, it's can be tough to
understand and you you you just need
someone to walk you through it. How do
you evaluate integrity when it comes to
hiring? We think of it as in one of
those like cultural competencies and how
do you assess it? So one, you can try to
get to situational questions. You tell
me about a time you you struggled with
something. Tell me about a time you made
a mistake. Tell me about a time
um you you did the wrong thing, whatever
it may be, and see what people share. We
use it through our behavioral
assessment. So like the it's actual way
to um get at sort of motivators and
drivers and some of those things come
through like integrity or others. And
then we get it at it through reference
checks, you know, both ones they
provide, but also ones that they don't
provide. Our view is like the hiring
process is fundamentally you're trying
to learn as much as you can about a
person and how they'll behave in the
role. You don't actually know until they
get into the role, but you can improve
your odds of success by being
disciplined on some of those dynamics. I
remember that when I got hired at a
three-letter agency and they were doing
my background check, they talked to
numerous references that I hadn't
provided. And I always found that an
interesting insight because
the ones that you provide are the least
likely to give insightful information.
>> Yeah. Um so they would go and they um
they just talked to anybody in my life
who would have been around like
including a neighbor to
my house and like does he party? What
time does he come in? Oh, I don't know
what questions they asked, but I always
found it interesting cuz my neighbor
came over one night to my mom who was
like, "I always knew that boy of yours
was going to get in trouble."
And it was just a background check like
and it was a reference check and it was
really interesting way to find out
information about people Yeah. uh in a
non-controlled sort of Yeah, it can be
really helpful to see um what people
share. We also in our interview process
base off of who also So um when you go
through the top grading exercise, you
know, I go through each role you've had,
what your scope was, what you did, what
your outcomes. But then I ask who your
manager was. I write that person's name
down. And so if you say your manager is
Sally Smith, I'll say, "Okay, what what
years was Sally your manager?" You know,
write them down. And what was Sally's
role? "Okay, she was the manager of
this."
And then when I call Sally, what is she
going to say about, you know, your
biggest strengths? And what is she going
to say about your biggest development
areas? And just shifting that from when
from if, like if I call versus when I
call, Yeah. People shift what they say.
They're more honest. And also just by
writing down Sally's name, like I I know
who your manager was now versus you
oftentimes you don't know who their
manager was, so you couldn't even get to
it if you wanted. And so getting people
to be more not necessarily more honest,
but more direct and more forthright with
what they're sharing is a way to also
get some of that out. And then ideally
you do verify it and have those
conversations and see if what they said
and what Sally said match up and it's
really helpful. This whole world is so
interesting to me because I for 15 years
I effectively worked with people you
could trust
uh by default. There wasn't a it was a
non-representative portion of society.
And then getting outside of that and
learning, you know, not everybody has
integrity and not everybody does the
right thing and not everybody is
trustworthy. And it's so weird just
coming from an area where I would say,
you know, a disproportionate percentage
of people were uh had integrity and
trustworthy and all of these things that
we look for on the outside. And then you
go outside and it's like, "Whoa, that's
that is a non-representative sample of
the population." Yeah, I don't think
like I by and large think people want to
do the right thing and want to do good
and are trustworthy, but I think people
are have blind spots about themselves.
They as you're talking, they want to
impress you, you know, it's a bit like
dating where you're not always you
you're you're covering up a little bit
and putting your best foot forward. And
we want to disarm people and try to get
them to be as honest as possible cuz
what we find sometimes is you can be a
great person and really talented, but
just not be the right fit for what we
need in this role. And so try to get
people to be as upfront and honest and
then ideally screen out those that
perhaps aren't. But you know, our our
view is we want to help everyone find
the right role and the right fit for
them. Do you keep tabs on those people
after? So it's like, "Oh, this person
was great. They're not a fit for this
role, but you know, something comes up
in 6 months, you're like, "Oh, yeah,
think of this person again." Yeah, we
love to keep a talent bench, both people
we've interviewed, but also people that
we just know and we think are impressive
that you know, if we have this type of
role or in this geography that we can
reach out to. Um we think it's a great
way to cultivate talent um and sort of
see opportunities, but we definitely
like we'll get to know people and then a
year or two, three years later there
might be some role that's in faith that
we end up working on. I always say life
is long. You people come back in and out
of your life in different ways. And um
when you meet really great people, you
try to keep them close because really
great people just not only from a
cultural or integrity perspective, but
also from a competency and a capability
perspective are rare to find that
combination. So when you find them, you
know, how do you keep them close? You've
studied a lot of business history. I'm
curious about some of the principles,
lessons, and stories that you constantly
find yourself thinking about.
>> Oh, there's I think too many to tell. I
mean, I think we we've talked a lot
about long-term. You one thing that
Warren always said to the CEOs is like
think about this business as if it's
your family's only asset and you can't
sell it for 50 years. Make decisions
with that in mind. And that to me
embodies like true long-term thinking,
how to think about your business. And
that's one that I sort of come back to.
Now, if maybe you're not be thinking
about every business for 50 years, but I
think that's something I think a lot
about. But I feel I I learn through
those types of examples and those types
of stories like most of us do, I think.
And so trying to remember those is
really valuable. Or you know, Warren's
comment on your reputation and if he
loses money, I'll be understanding, but
if he loses his reputation, I'll be
ruthless. We think about that. Or you
know, the newspaper test, like if this
were on the front page of the newspaper
by a fair, critical reporter that your
family would read, how would you feel
about it? Things like that you know,
always stand out to me. I want to speak
just a little bit about inflation. How
do you think about inflation in relation
to investing? Yeah, I mean I think that
um a few things. One is when we think
about businesses, we try to find
businesses that we think, and this goes
back to the like has the moat, is that
typically they're a little bit more
insulated from inflation because they
usually can pass it on to their
customers. If you have a better business
that's higher quality, that has a moat,
you usually can pass on inflation. And
so it's less it's an issue, but it's
less of an issue for the businesses that
can do that. And so we're trying to be
thoughtful about that. Second, with our
businesses, you even if there is
inflation and we don't want to pass it
on or pass on all of it is like how do
we improve productivity in our business
so that in essence we're combating some
of the inflation we may be experiencing.
And we think most businesses can improve
productivity you 2 to 5% a year every
year just by being disciplined about it.
And so that's a way to also counter some
of the impacts with it. But I think
that's like the level of how we think
about it in our businesses. You also
have you easy think about your new
investments, um what that means in terms
of your willingness to pay, the
consequences with that. It ultimately
translates into interest rates as well.
Those are all things that we factor in.
That being said, like I've never been a
macro investor. I think it's hard to
predict the macro. It's hard to invest
based on that. And so I'd much rather
focus on the fundamentals of find
high-quality businesses at reasonable
valuations that have good dynamics and
aspects of the business. And then you
can absorb more dynamics like inflation
or tariffs or things like that that are
going to inevitably probably happen at
some time in some space. The president
today came out and suggested that
financial reporting should move to 6
months instead of quarterly.
Um so I'm wondering how you think about
in terms of
quarterly reporting versus annual
reporting how that affects behavior of
CEOs. Quarterly reporting, especially in
the public markets, is a net negative
for companies, for investors. I think
it's intended to provide transparency,
but it it ends up doing short-term
thinking. What am I going to do to drive
the results this quarter? And you see it
all the time, right? I'm going to try to
move sales into this quarter. I'll get a
discount if you you buy my product this
quarter. I need to like hit my number or
I'm going to invest in something that I
can do this quarter or next quarter to
achieve it. So, I think it fundamentally
doesn't support what's best for the
company and what's best for the
investor. That being said, I think that
you want someone, I presumably I think
the CEO can do it, managing the business
more frequently than every 6 months or
every year. Like if you only going to
look at your financials, your
performance once a year or once every 6
months, I think you're going to miss
opportunities to make adjustments where
needed in the business. But I don't
think you necessarily need investors to
do that if you have the right management
team and you have confidence. I think
the challenge is if you don't have the
right management team, are you getting
visibility into that and how to navigate
it? I would probably err on the side of
not having quarterly earnings because of
all the negative aspects, but I think
you've got to solve that other issue in
terms of are you managing the business
close enough? Are there public companies
or public company CEOs that you admire?
Yeah, of course. I mean, I think there's
business that like I think there's
different things that I'd say in terms
of admiring. So, I think if you look at
like Danaher, that business, Mitchell
Rails, and Steve Rails, and ultimately
the CEOs that have followed is
remarkable. Both the performance of the
business, the success of the business,
how they've done it, their system,
incredibly
uh I have a lot of respect for them. I
mean, if you look at Nick Hawley of
TransDigm, like the performance, he's no
longer CEO, but the performance during
his CEO tenure was significant. I mean,
remarkable performance and he had his
own business system in terms of how he
was doing that. I think there's other
people I have tremendous respect from
like what they've accomplished. I mean,
if you look at Bezos build at Amazon, I
mean, that's incredibly remarkable in
terms of the world and the impact that
it's had. I learn a lot from other
people who have come before us in terms
of how they manage and what they do. I
think the pressure is there's a lot for
any CEO, especially public CEOs, in
terms especially right now um of what
they're expected to have a view on, what
they're expected to manage, what you
know, the consequences of having those
views and everything. I think it's
particularly challenging for any CEO,
but especially those in the public
public view. How do you think about the
role of politics in sort of companies?
Should companies have political
opinions? I don't think there's a right
answer or a wrong answer to that. I
think you need leaders who are authentic
and genuine. And if they are people who
have views and share those views or want
to share those views and that's key to
who they are in the business, I think
that I can understand why they do that
and the benefit of that. That being
said, I think we're in a very divisive
time right now and I think sometimes
people have a lot of views and they
share those views and they assume their
customers have the same views and
sometimes I think there's businesses
where that may not be the best approach
um for the companies. By and large, my
approach is I think that CEOs should be
really
thoughtful before they have views on
topics publicly, especially if those are
topics that their customers or their
employees may have differing views. But
if it's
you know, a founder or someone who has
strong views, I don't think they
necessarily have to cover those up
either. So, I think it's a little bit of
a it depends answer, which is it feels
like a cop-out, but
>> No, I think I think that's the best
answer I've heard in a long time. Tracy,
we always end these interviews with the
same question, which is what is success
for you? Yeah, I mean, success for me is
really
leaving things better off than I found
them. And that is both in terms of the
companies I work with, the people I
engage with, my family, building my own
life and building the lives around me of
the people around me to be something
great that they care about, that are
special, that are impactful, and that
are sort of creating value for them and
creating value for those around them.
That's a beautiful answer. Thank you so
much for taking the time today. Yeah, of
course. Thanks for listening and
learning with us. Until next time.
[Music]